
Data Mishaps night

Metrics are easy, counting and denominators are hard: a NSM tale

I interchange using I and we throughout this talk because
so much of my work was collaborative, mainly with the head of data, but also with other members of our data team.

When I was at DataCamp, I was promoted to be the first product data scientist, and along with that role
came the responsibility of helping to develop the company's north star metric. We surprised the new head of
product by coming up
with the NSM reasonably fast, and got it into a dashboard even faster. When we were ready to announce it, we
did it with style. I presented at a company all-hands meeting, plus released an accompanying blog post I had written,
contextualizing our choices
and explaining what the metric meant for the company.

The NSM was a hit! An entire department of the company completely re-organized itself around the results we found.
Fundamentally, we had uncovered awesome insights into how users interacted with our content. For more on my thoughts
on metric design, especially north star metrics, I have a talk I gave at the DC R conference that is on youtube if you're
interested.

A few months in to having the NSM live, I was tagged on our public data slack channel by our mobile PM.
He'd been looking at the NSM and was fairly certain that mobile course units were being double counted.
Here's where my two data mishaps lessons come into play.

Number one: counting is hard, and that can make getting the correct denominator when calculating a metric even harder.
We did double count mobile units, and while the reason exactly escapes me, it wasn't the first or last time
that had happened, it was merely the biggest and widest-reaching metric I messed up a denominator on.
When initially developing the NSM, which my NDA and common sense dictates I must be vague about,
so forgive me that, we implemented a correction in the code to make sure we were counting the
correct group of subscribers for one part of the metric's denominator. So we had thought about this, but
we had missed something. It happens.

In this case of double-counting mobile content units, I very much had. I took responsibility for the error,
addressed the issue immediately, made sure the proper stakeholders were pre-informed of the error and changes,
and when we'd fixed it, we did so with another company-wide announcement explaining what the problem had been,
the change we made, and how that change had affected the metric. Ultimately, double-counting mobile units
hadn't really changed things much, and it wasn't a fatal error by far.

Lesson number two was harder to swallow, and is what I urge you to remember: I immediately jumped in on that slack
message from the mobile PM defensive about my work. No, we didn't double count, he was mistaken! I defended when
I should have instead asked him follow up questions to establish that we were on the same page.
This was a valuable piece of feedback I got from the head of data, and that's what I've carried forward from
this data mishap of mine, though you have to admit, the phrase "counting is hard" is pithy and fun to say.

Thank you!


w/some ad libs: 2:16
w/some ad libs after edit: 3:58
